
---PAGE 1---
From The General 16/2  BISMARCK 
 
5.28 In the basic game, if the Bismarck breaks out with a move of 3 or 
less could the Prinz Eugen still move 4 or 5 at no fuel cost?  
 
A. Yes. 
 
7.23 If German ships have passed through a zone must their general type 
and number be revealed?  
 
A. Yes. 
 
9.64 In determining the shots that can he fired, are the salvoes available 
first assigned to a target and then halved? Or are the salvoes available 
halved and then the shots divided among the targets? 
 
A. The salvoes are assigned and then halved. 
 
9.716'1f a ship is firing directly into a ship's bow or stern.' By 'directly', 
do you mean a firing ship is firing directly at a bow or stern if it is only 
in the hex directly in front of the bow or behind the stem? Or do You 
mean a ship is firing directly at the bow or stern if it is anywhere in the 
bow or stem sectors as defined in 9.67? 
 
A. Directly in front of the bow or behind the stern as indicated by the 
shaded hexes in the diagram in 9.716. 
 
9.717 If a ship with a 0 in a secondary hit box receives a secondary hit 
on that side, must the box be crossed out before any secondary hits are 
treated as midships hits? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. Is K22 considered a coast hex?  
 
A. Yes. 
 
23.21 Can destroyers refuel as per 17.0  
 
A. No.  
 
Q. Is combat allowed when the visibility is X?  
 
A. No. 
 
35.0 Ferrol Table - Is the Spanish reaction to the British Raid Table 
triggered by a British attack against German ships in port? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. Are evasion losses due to torpedo damage permanent or repairable? 
 
A. Repairable in port only. 
 
Q. May ships in Ferrol refuel? Replenish ammunition? 
 
A. Yes. In case of Ammo, yes for die roll 2. No for die roll 3-5 on Ferrol 
table. 
 
29.3 Is air loss determined before or after penetration? 
 
A. After air penetration. 
 
Battle Board Procedure. 
 
Q. Can ships move through hexes containing other friendly ships? 
 
A. No. 
 
Q. Can a ship make a direction change before moving into another hex? 
 
A. Yea. 
 
Q. Can a ship, more than six hexes away from all enemy ships, but not 
designated as a withdrawing ship, withdraw immediately anyway? 
 
A. No. 
 
Q. Does a ship with one gun box left get one shot, or is it rounded down 
to none? Is a ship with one gun box that is halved then halved again 
unable to fire, or does it still get one shot? 
 
A. Ships always get one shot (if they have at least one gun box left). 
 
Q. If the Prince of Wales, King George V, or the Tirpitz are firing only 
one section of their guns (bow or stern), do they have to throw to see if 
one section jams, or can they automatically jam the non-firing section?  
 
A. They still must roll dice to determine which section jams. If it is 
the non-firing section, luck is on your side. 
 
Q. Does a ship with 0 listed for secondary armament take one secondary 
hit?  
 
A. Yes.  
 
Q. Can ships torpedoes be fired through hexes occupied by other ships 
(friendly and enemy)?  
 
A. Yes.  
 
Q. Does fog affect shadowing?  
 
A. No.  
 
Q. Can German ships attack convoys when the visibility is X?  
 
A. No.  
 
Q. When using additional German ships or French ships under German 
control with the Basic Game rules, does the British Player have to throw 
on the Chance Table for each German/French ship in the game? Can 
each ship attack convoys as a result of the chart?  
 
A. Yes to both questions. Of course, German ships in task force only 
have to abide by the first chance roll for any ship in each task force.  
 
Q. When is the Spanish Reaction To British Raid Table used?  
 
A. if German ships have entered Ferrol and are then attacked by British 
planes there.  
 
Q. Which column on the Chance Table would a ship in O17 use (A, B or 
C?). A ship in O18?  
 
A. 017 - Column A, 018 - Column C.  
  
Q. Are the evasion rating modifiers on the Ship Combat Torpedo Table 
correct? Are these used per Intermediate rule 19.5? What kind of 
damage do these hits cause?  
 
A. The modifiers are correct. Omitted: A ship which evades gets a -1 to 
the die. Damage is rolled on the Torpedo Damage Table.  
 
Q. Is the listing of a modifier for visibility level 7 on the Air Loss Table 
a mistake, since planes cannot fly when the visibility is 7 or worse?  
 

---PAGE 2---
A. They cannot take off in visibility 7 or worse. They can fly into and 
attack in a zone in visibility 7 or worse.  
 
Q. Can British ships move into German ports?  
 
A. No.  
 
Q. Can German ships move into British ports?  
 
A. No.  
 
Q. Can British air units attack German ships in port? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. Can German air units attack British ships in port? 
 
A. No, unless the Intermediate Port rule (37.0) is used. 
 
Q. Does the intermediate Game end when the Bismarck enters a port? 
 
A. No. 
 
Q. Why is the Scheer (PB) symbol on the back of the counter smaller 
than the Prince Eugen's symbol (CA)? 
 
A. Because the Scheer was a small ship whose silhouette was not as 
similar to a battleship as was the Prince Eugen's. 
 
Q. Can a ship repairing at sea repair the same section in more than one 
turn as long as it doesn't throw an Unsuccessful attempt, until it has only 
one damaged box left? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. The Suffolk and Norfolk shadowed the Bismarck in history, yet in 
the game they can only do so by risking an attack by the Bismarck and 
Prince Eugen, because the evasion rating of the Eugen enables it to 
engage the two British cruisers, which means the Bismarck can also 
engage if in a task force with the Eugen. Is there any way to avoid this 
situation? 
 
A. The Bismarck and Eugen must be able to locate these ships by search 
in order to attack them. Once on the board the cruisers can outrace the 
Bismarck and need deal only with the Prince Eugen. 
 
Q. Does the French CT Flotilla function the same as a destroyer flotilla? 
 
A. Yes 
 
Bismarck errata 
 
Rules Manual 
 
For all Rectangular Ship Counters: The stern of the ship is always next 
to its name. The bow of the ship is always next to its evasion rating. 
 
8.18 Last sentence - Change the word 'decreased' to 'increased'. 
 
9.222 add to the next to last sentence: 'When a task force is attacking, its 
current evasion level is that of the fastest ship (excluding aircraft 
carriers)'.  
 
Major Change: No ship, convoy or air combat can occur in visibility 
level X. Ignore any and all rules to the contrary.  
 
17.3 first sentence - change 'Z20' to read 'Z10'.  
 
Add 19.7 The effect of each hit is resolved on the Torpedo Damage 
Table. 
 
23.53 Change the first sentence to read '...the British player rolls two 
dice...'  
 
27.52 Change the first sentence to read 'Land-based bomber and carrier-
based bomber attacks, land-based bomber air units from different home 
bases or carrier-based air attacks from different carriers not in the same 
task force can never be combined. Only bomber air units from the 
carrier or carriers in the task force can combine their strength in attack.'  
 
Add - '40.7 Ships in port may repair two evasion factors per turn.' 
 
41.5 delete last sentence beginning with 'If a shadowing ship...' 
 
55.11 change '(p.34)' to '(p.35)' 
 
58.5 delete word 'light' 
 
p.28 The ammo for Prinz Eugen and Bismarck must be switched. 
 
p.31 Delete the specifications for Exeter on page 31. The correct 
specifications are on page 33. 
 
Terrain Effects Chart.  
 
3. Coast Zone - Change last sentence to read 'German ships cannot enter 
a port zone in Great Britain'. 
 
IMPORTANT - British and German Player Aid Cards - The signs of the 
modifiers in the Visibility Track must be reversed e.g., -1 in the level 1 
box must be changed to +1; the +2 in the Level X box must be changed 
to -2, etc.  
 
Intermediate Tables Card, Phase 3 Intermediate Shadow Table - Change 
'Br LR Recon' under column B to read 'BR Air Recon'. Add 'All Ger 
Ships - Z' to column C.  
 
Intermediate Tables Card, Phase 9 Ship Combat Torpedo Table - Add to 
'Modifications to Colored Die' - 'Ship Conducting Evasion: -1 to colored 
die'.  
 
Basic Game Tables Card, Shadow Table Modifications to Die Roll - 
delete Level 0 modification. Change Level 1 modification from 0 to -1.  
 
IMPORTANT ADDITION '9.57 On the battle board, a ship can move 
only into the hex that its bow points'. Although this is already inferred in 
the rules, it is not exactly spelled out.  
 
Add 9.57 In addition to the movement possibilities permitted to ships at 
an evasion level of 30 or greater, allow all cruisers (heavy and light) 
with such an evasion level an additional move for a total of three hexes 
straight ahead as long as they make no turns.  
 
Reformatted and typos corrected.  
Original from http://grognard.com/ 
NB submitted by John Kula (kula@telus.net) 
on behalf of the Strategy Gaming Society 
(http://www.boardgamegeek.com/~sgs),  
originally collected by Andrew Webber  
(gbm@wwwebbers.com) 
 
 
 
