
---PAGE 1---
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
BISMARCK is a thorough update of the 
popular Avalon Hill release of the same name 
issued in the early sixties. The game now 
includes, however , a more historical presenta­
tion of the campaign while retaining much of 
its predecessor's simplicity and ease of play . 
BISMARCK is composed of three games of 
increasing complexity. The Basic Game pits 
the German battleship Bismarck and heavy 
cruiser Prinz Eugen against the might of the 
British navy and can be played in less than 2½ 
hours . The Intermediate Game expands upon 
the historical scenario by providing various 
alternative orders of battle which cou ld have 
occurred . The Advanced Game uses a 
miniatures -oriented combat system similar to 
that employed in another Avalon Hill game , 
JUTLAND, to present the ultimate in tactical 
naval combat. Players should play each game 
in the order presented as this is the easiest 
method to assimilate the system of play . 
1.1 Historical Background 
At dusk on May 21 , 1941 , the German 
Battleship Bismarck , accompanied by the 
heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , quietly slipped from 
her base in Bergen, Norway to begin one of the 
most dramatic chapters of naval history. Her 
orders: clear the Atlantic of Allied shipping . 
Success would mean the isolation and eventu ­
al defeat of Great Britain . Defeat would mean 
the loss of Germany's only operational battle ­
ship and an indefinite delay to the Krieg smar­
ine's strategic timetable . 
C1979 THE AVALON HILL GAME CO . BALTIMORE. MD 21214 
Success in the operation hinged upon the 
ability of the Bismarck to sneak past the British 
air and naval search screen which extended 
from Britain to Green land . Once out in the vast 
expanse of the Atlantic , it would be diff icult for 
the British to maintain offensive search patro ls 
of sufficient strength to defeat her. 
Taking advantage of the bad weather in the 
Arctic regions, Bismarck and Prinz Eugen 
sailed north of Iceland and through the 
Denmark Straits between Iceland and Green ­
land. While in passage , the Bismarck was 
discovered by the British cruisers Suffolk and 
Norfolk, who quickly radioed the Bismarck 's 
position . Early the next morning the British 
battleships Hood and Prince of Wales , homing 
in on the radio signals , intercepted them . In 
one of the most famous naval battles in history, 
the Bismarck blew up the Hood and damaged 
the Prince of Wales, which then quickly 
retreated out of action . Great though the 
victory was, the Bismarck was sti II in danger as 
long as the two British cruisers maintained 
contact with her. British capital ships were 
closing in from all directions and it would be 
but a matter of hours before they would 
recommence battle . 
Admiral Lutjens , the German commander, 
decide d that the operation was too risky to 
continue and ordered a change of course for 
the Bismarck back to the French port of Brest 
while the Prinz Eugen was to maint ain the 
original course and mission . This move caught 
the British shadowing force completely off 
guard . The Bismarck was able to sha ke off her 
pursuers and was racing undetected to France 
when an unfortunate radio message was 
issued by Lutjens to Germany, deta iling the 
victory of the previous morning . The British 
were able to locate the source of the sig na I and 
the chase was on again . The jurrip that the 
Bismarck had gained meant that the aircra ft 
carrier Ark Royal was all that stood betwee n 
her and safety. Two desper ate air strikes w ere 
launched from t his carrier in hopes of stopping 
the Bismarck . One lucky hit damaged the 
Bismarck's rudder which forced her to reduce 
speed. This was exactly wha t the British 
needed . Early the next day, the battleships 
King George V and Rodne y caugh t up with the 
Bismarck as her crew was vainly trying to 
repair the damage . At these odds, and in the 
condition she was in, the Bismar ck was 
doomed to defeat. Firing for almost two hours , 
the British battleships were unable to sink her, 
although they knocked out all of her guns. It 
finally took a comb ination of torpe do damage 
and scuttling charges to send the mighty 
Bismarck to the bottom . 
BISMARCK recreates this operation in 
detail. Each player or side controls either the 
British or German order-of -battle as it actually 
existed . The German player attempts to break 
the Bismarck and Prinz Eugen out into the 
Atlant ic and gain victory points by sinking 
enemy ships and convoys. The British player 
must utilize his superior numbers to locate, 
corner and sink the Bismarck . 
7190001 
S6908 

---PAGE 2---
1.2 Brief Synopsis of Play 
The Basic Game is played in turns, each 
representing four hours of real time. In each 
turn, both players secretly move any or all 
ships and air units under their command on 
the search board. Each player may then call out 
zones in which he has searching ships and / or 
air units in an attempt to locate the opponent's 
ships. If an air unit locates an enemy ship in its 
zone, it may conduct an air strike . If opposing 
ships are discovered in the same zone, they 
may proceed to combat on the Battle Board . 
Ships fire simultaneously and damage is 
recorded on the HIT RECORD PAD. Play 
continues until the Bismarck returns to port , is 
sunk, or time runs out . The player who has 
acquired the most victory points wins the 
game. 
2.0 COMPONENTS 
2.1 Parts Inventory 
1. Game Box and Lid 
2. Two Identical Search Boards 
3. One Battle Board 
4. One Sheet of Die-cut Counters 
5. One Set of 6 Player-Aid Cards 
6. Two Range Finders and Battle Maneuver 
Gauges 
7. Hit Record Pad 
8. Two Dice (one colored and one white) 
9. Rules Manual 
2.2 Search Board 
There are two identical search boards (one 
for each player) provided in the game . Each 
player uses a search board to maneuver his 
ships and air units in an attempt to locate 
oppos ing ships and convoys. All movement 
and location of units on the search board must 
be hidden from the view of the opponent. 
Players can either place a box-half upright 
between the two boards (placing one board 
over the box lid to hold it in place) or place each 
board in a different location in order to 
accomplish this. 
Printed on each search board is a map of 
the North Atlantic over which the Bismarck 
operation occurred . The map has been divided 
into square 'zones· . Each zone is approximate­
ly 90 statute miles in length. Ships may only 
enter or move through zones which contain a 
grid -coordinate (EXCEPTION: see TERRAIN 
EFFECTS CHART). Air units may enter any 
zone either with or without a grid-coordinate. 
No unit can enter a portion of the map which 
does not contain a zone. Partial zones conta in­
ing a grid-coordinate (and the Bordeaux air 
base) along the edge of the board and along 
some of the land borders are considered and 
used as normal zones . Partial zones without a 
grid-coordinate other than Bordeaux cannot be 
entered by any unit. 
Each grid-coordinate is composed of one 
letter and one or two digits . It is used to identify 
that particular zone and to establish the zones 
which ships can enter . All significant features 
of the search board map are identified on the 
terrain effects chart found on the cover of 
this manual. 
2.3 Battle Board 
During search procedure, whenever oppos­
ing ships are discovered to be in the same zone 
on the search board, play may revert to the 
battle board , where ship to ship combat is 
resolved . At the start of any battle, the 
BASIC GAME 
defending ships are placed in the center 
hexagon (hereafter referred to as hex). Any and 
all of the attacking ships are placed in any of 
the outermost hexes along any one edge 
randomly determined by a die roll. 
2.4 Unit Counters and Markers 
Included in the game is a sheet of die-cut 
counters which represent all of the major 
fighting ships and air units that participated in 
the campaign, plus some optional ships which 
could have been involved . Also included are 
different types of markers to be used as playing 
aids. Enough counters and markers have been 
provided to play the basic and advanced 
games . Several of the optional rules in the 
intermediate game require players to provide 
their own markers. Only those ship and air unit 
counters listed in each player's BASIC GAME 
ORDER OF APPEARANCE CHART and the 
markers described below are used in the basic 
game. All others should be placed aside. Their 
use will be explained in the appropriate game 
in which they are to be included. 
2.41 Counter Identification 
2.411 Search Board Ship and Air Counters 
■ 
Ship Counter 
■ 
Destroyer Flotilla 
■ 
Submarine Counter 
2-1 
~ 
Ark Royal 
Torpedo Bomber Air Unit 
1~ 
Zeppelin 
Dive Bomber Air Unit 
~-1 
!./.a 
Victorious 
Fighter Air Unit 
2-1 
~ 
2 • 6 
Eire 
Long Range Reconnaissance Level Bomber 
(LR recon) Air Unit Air Unit 
2.412 Tactical Board Ship Counters 
BC 8 
Repulse 28 
NOTE: There are no Tactical Board Counters 
for submarines or destroyers. 
2 
2.413 Advanced Tactical Ship Counters 
(used in Advanced Game only) 
NOTE: All counters have a white stripe on a 
blue background . There are no Advanced 
Tactical Ship counters for submarines or 
destroyers . 
2.414 Markers 
Search 
Conditions 
Visibility 
■ 
Air Unit Return to Base 
II 
Time 
EJ 
Shadow 
B 
Location Ship Unit Return to Base 
(also used for task forces) 
II 
Task Force Number 
Convoy Escort quadrant 
2.42 Ship Counters 
Each ship has a ½" square counter that 
represents it on the search board . Printed on 
the counter is various information needed for 
play. 
Front of Counter 
movement mode 
search 
Back of Counter 
patrol mode 
Pnnz ■~strength 
-- name Eugen 
~ CA Patrol 
r maximum speed 
evasion rating 

---PAGE 3---
2.42 1 Nationality: 
Front of 
Counter 
Germany Gold letter-
ing on black 
background 
Great White letter-
Britain ing on red 
background 
France (not White letter -
used in ing on blue 
Basic Game) background 
United White letter -
States (not ing on green 
used in background 
Basic Game) 
2.422 General Type of Ship 
Batt leship 
BB- Battleship 
BC-Battlecruiser 
Back of 
Counter 
Black letter -
ing on gold 
background 
Red letter -
ing on white 
background 
Blue letter -
ing on white 
background 
Green letter-
ing on white 
background 
PB- Pocket Battleship (more accurately 
termed Armored Cru iser) 
~ 
CA- Heavy Cruiser 
CL-Light Cruiser 
Aircraft Carrier 
CV- Aircraft Carrier 
Destroye r 
DD or CT - Destroyer (CT is an abbreviation for 
Contre -Torpilleur - a fast French destroyer) ­
not used in Basic Game 
Subma rine 
SS or UB·Submarine (UB is an abbreviation for 
U-Boat)- not used in Basic Game . 
2.423 M ovement and Patrol M ode- When 
the front of the counter is face-up . the ship is in 
movement mode. When the back of the 
counter is face -up, the ship is in patrol mode. A 
ship in movement mode can move up to its 
maximum speed . A ship in patrol mode cannot 
move but has a greater search capability . 
Aircraft carriers do not have a patro l mode . 
They cannot patrol. 
2. 424 Searc h Strengths - The left -hand 
number indicates the ship 's search capabi lity 
during day light turns . The right -hand number 
indicates the ship's search capability during 
night turns. 
i.425 Name-The name of the ship . 
2.426 Evasion Rating- The ship 's maximum 
speed in knots . On the search board, the 
evasion rating is used to determine whethe r a 
ship can break away from a shadowing ship. 
2.427 Maximu m Speed- The greatest num­
ber of zones that a ship can move in one turn. 
No ship has a maximum speed greater than 
two. 
2.43 Air Unit Counters 
There are two basic types of air unit counters 
used in the basic game : long range reconnais ­
sance and bomber . The bomber air units are 
further divided into two sub -types. level 
bomber and torpedo bomber . The silhouette on 
the front side of the counter indicates the type 
of air unit that it represents . 
Front of Counter 
moveme nt mode 
Back of Counte r 
patrol mode 
2.43 1 
search 
strength 
maximum 
speed 
of airc raft 
' / endurance rating 
Nationality 
Front of 
Counter 
Germany Black print-
ing on blue-
gray 
background 
Great Black print · 
Britain ing on brown 
background 
home base 
Back of 
Counter 
Blue-gray 
printing on 
white back-
ground 
Brown print-
ing on white 
background 
2.4 32 A ll bomber air units used in the basic 
game have either the torpedo bomber or the 
leve l bomber si lhouette on the front of the 
counter and either one of the reeonna issance 
silhouettes or nothing on the back. 
Type-
~ -Land-Based Reconna issance 
T - Ship-Based Reconnaissance 
~ -Torpedo Bomber 
~ - Level Bomber 
~ -Dive Bomber 
.,,,/' - Fighter 
2.43 3 All LR recon air units have the land­
based reconnaissance silhouette with the 
word 'Patrol' on the back . 
2.43 4 Mode - A ll LR recon air units have a 
movement and patro l mode. When the front of 
the counter is face -up. the LR recon air unit is 
in movement mode . When the back of the 
counter is face-up. the LR recon air unit is in 
patro l mode. Like ship coun ters, an LR recon 
air unit in patro l mode has a reduced maximum 
speed but an increased search capability . 
Bomber air units have an attack and 
reconnaissance mode (EXCEPTION: German 
leve l bomber air units do not have a reconnais­
sance mode). When the front of the counter is 
face-up, the bomber air unit is in attack mode. 
It can attack any located enemy ship in the 
same zone it is in . When the back of the 
counter is face-up. the bomber air unit is in 
reconnaissance mode. It has a grea ter endur­
ance. speed and search capab ili ty, but it 
cannot launch an air attack . LR recon air units 
can never launch an air attack. 
2.435 Search Strengths - Identica l in func ­
tion to ship 's Search Strengths 
2.436 Endurance Rating-The number of 
turns that an air unit can remain in flight. 
2.437 Maximum Speed- The maximum 
number of zones that an air unit can move in 
one turn . 
2.43 8 Home Base- Location from which air 
unit operates (either aircraft carrier or land 
base). 
2. 439 # of Aircraft - This value is used only in 
the intermediate game and is ignored in the 
basic game . 
3 
2.5 Search Board Marker Infor mation 
These markers have been provided to aid in 
identifying location or mission of ships on the 
search board and are used only on the search 
board . 
2 .51 Convoy: Two Brit ish battleships are 
relegated to convoy escort at the start of play . A 
convoy marker is placed over each of the ships 
to identify their special assignment. The arrow 
indica tes the direction the convoy is moving . 
2 .52 Task Force: Ships which are to move 
and have combat as a sing le force must be 
placed in a task force. A task force marker is 
used to identify the task force on the search 
board. 
2 .53 Shadow : A shadow marker is used to 
remind players which ships on the search 
board are being shadowed . One is placed in 
each zone that the shadowed ships occupy. 
2 .54 Locatio n: These markers aid in tracking 
the position of enemy ships which have been 
located by search . The type symbol printed on 
the location counter indicates the type of ship 
located. Beca use of the great variety of ship 
types included in the game , only a lim ited 
numbe r of location marke rs have been pro­
vided. If players need more location markers, 
they can either handmake them or comman ­
deer other type marke rs used in the intermedi­
ate or advanced games . The numbe r marke rs 
are especially suitab le. Just write in the type 
symbol of the vessel being tracked on the 
marker. 
2.6 Battle Board Ship Counter Information 
Used only on the battle board. The cou nters 
have been designed to fit snugly into the batt le 
board hexes. 
turrets anti-aircraft value 
8 
name 
secondary armament evas ion rating 
2.61 Anti-Aircraft Value: Not used in the 
basic game . 
2.62 Evasion Rating : Same value as on 
search board ship counte r. On the battle board. 
the evasion rating determines the abili ty of the 
ship to withdraw from combat . 
2.6 3 Name: Name of ship 
2.64 Turrets and Secondary Armament: 
Indicates the position of these gun sections on 
the ship counter. 
2 .7 Player Aid Marker Informat ion 
Used on the player a id card to keep track of 
time, air and ship endurance or visibi lity 
conditions: 
2.8 Playe r Aid M aterials 
2.8 1 Each player receives a Player A id Card 
corresponding to the nationality of the side he 
is . playing . On the card is given the Order of 
Battle . Time Record Track , and the Visibility 
Tables. He also gets the Basic Game Tables 
card containing the Search and Shadow 
Tables . Optimum placement of the card is 
upright against the boxtop between the search 
boards . 
2.8 2 Hit Record Pad 
The Hit Record Pad is used to keep track of 
damage and salvoes available for each ship. 
Only one side of the hit record pad. labell ed 
'Bismarck Hit Record Pad', is used in the basic 
game. 

---PAGE 4---
2 .83 Range Finder and Battle Maneuver 
Gauge 
These implements are used in the advanced 
game only . 
3.0 PREPARE FOR PLAY 
Both players decide which game level to play . 
Players should become familiar with the basic 
game first before venturing into the more 
advanced games . Each player takes his player 
aid card with the 'Basic Game ' side up and 
places it in a convenient location out of the 
view of his opponent. The opponent should 
never be perm itted to look at the player aid card 
at any time during the game . The players also 
put their basic game tables card in a conve • 
nient location . Both players punch out the ship 
and air unit counters that they will use and 
place them on the search board as detailed in 
the order of appearance . Only those ships and 
air units listed in the basic game order of 
appearance are used in the basic game. All of 
the remaining counters are reserved for the 
more advanced versions . A battle board 
counter for each battleship , cruiser and 
aircraft carrier is also punched out and set 
aside wi th the battle board to be used in naval 
or air combat. Each player takes one sheet 
from the hit record pad. Begin play . 
4 .0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY 
BISMARCK is played in turns . Each tu rn is 
divided into several phases which must be 
performed in the sequence described below . 
4 .1 Unit Availability Phase: The Brit ish 
player places on the search board any ships 
wh ich enter play in the current turn . Air units 
available from rest and ref it in the current turn 
can be returned to their base . 
4 .2 Visibility Phase: The German player 
determines the visibility conditions for the 
current turn. Ships may enter into or break 
from task force or convoy during this phase . 
4 .3 Shadow Determination Phase: Either or 
both players may select one air unit or ship in 
the same zone as a located enemy ship to 
shadow that ship . The ship must have the 
same or greate r evasion rating than the ship it 
is attempt ing to shadow . All ships designated 
for shadow must move in this phase . The 
Shadow Table is then ut ili zed to determi ne the 
success of the shadow attempt. 
4.4 Air Movement Phase: Any and all air 
units in play may move up to their maximum 
speed . Air units which must return to base are 
removed from the search board onto the Time 
Record Chart to be returned after a period of 
rest and refit. 
4 .5 Ship Movement Phase: Any and all ships 
in play which have not moved in the Shadow 
Determination Phase may move up to their 
maximum speed . 
4.6 Search Phase: Each player may search 
every zone in which he has sufficient search 
capacity as determined by the visibility level for 
the current turn . 
4 . 7 Air Attack Phase: An air unit in attack 
mode and in the same zone as a located enemy 
ship may launch an air attack against that ship . 
Air units which flew from base this turn and 
with remaining movement may return to base 
after all combat is resolved. 
4 .8 Naval Combat Phase: If both players 
have one or more located ships in the same 
zone, they may conduct combat between these 
ships on the battle board if either player 
w ishes . 
4 .9 Chance Phase: The British player rolls 
two dice and consults the Chance Table to 
determine whether the Bismarck and / or Prinz 
Eugen locates a convoy or are themselves 
located by gen eral search . At the conclusion of 
the chance phase , each player moves his time 
mark er to the next turn on his time record 
track . This same sequence of phases is 
followed each turn . 
5.0 SHIP ACTIVITIES ON 
THE SEARCH BOARD 
5.1 Ship Movement 
5 .11 A playe r can move all , some or none of 
his ship counters on the search board in a turn . 
A player is never required to move any of his 
ships in a turn . 
5 . 12 A cruiser may move up to two zones 
each turn. 
5 . 13 A battleship or aircraft carrier with a 
maximum speed of '2' may move two zones in 
non-consecutive turns. It must alternate each 
turn that it moves two zones w ith at least one 
turn in which it moves less than two zones . 
5 .14 A battleship with a maximum speed of 
' 1 • (either Rodney, Ramillies or Revenge) may 
move up to one zone each turn . 
5 .15 All movement made by battl eships or 
aircraft carriers is subject to fuel limitations 
(see section 5.2). The maximum speed of any 
ship can be reduced due to battle damage . 
5 . 16 A ship can move less than its maximum 
speed or not at all. It is never required to mov e. 
5 . 17 When moving, each zone entered must 
be adjacent to the zone being exited . A ship 
counter cannot enter a zone which does not 
contain a grid -coordinate. There are several 
exceptions and they are enumerated in the 
Terrain Effects Key. 
7 
5. 18 There are entr y and exit restrict ions at 
certai n ports that prevent a ship from moving 
to certain adjacent zones . These restrictions 
are detailed in the Terrai n Effects Key. German 
ships cannot enter a zone in the Irish Sea 
(these zones have black instead of white grid • 
coordinates) , nor can German ship s enter a 
zone containing a port in Great Britain . 
Otherwise , a ship can enter any zone with a 
grid -coordinate w hich is adjacentto the zone it 
occup ies. 
5.19 Any number of ships may enter and / or 
occupy the same zone w ithout penalty . A ship 
cannot move off the search mapboard . 
5 .2 Battleship and Aircraft Carrier Fuel 
Allotment 
5 .21 In the basic game, cruisers are exempt· 
ed from any fuel expenditure . They can move 
up to two zones each turn without penalty . A 
battleship or aircraft carrier with a maximum 
speed of ·2· must expend one fuel factor of its 
fuel allotment each turn that it moves iwo 
zones. 
5.22 As long as a battleship or aircraft carrier 
w ith a maximum speed of ·2· has at least one 
unexpended fuel factor , it can move one zone 
each turn without any fuel exper.diture. 
5.23 When a battleship or aircraft carrier 
expends all of the fuel factors available to it. it 
can no longer move normally and must 
henceforth utilize emergency movement . 
5 .24 Ships in emergency movement can 
move up to one zone every second turn . These 
alternate turns are labelled 'C' on the time 
record track . Ships in emergency movement 
cannot move in a turn which is not labelled ·c· . 
4 
5.25 A battleship w ith a max imum speed of 
• 1 ' expends one fuel factor only if it moves one 
zone in a non 'C' turn . Once it expends all of its 
fuel factors , it can only move by emergency 
movement . 
5.26 Each player records fuel expenditure by 
checking off one fuel box in the fuel section on 
the hit record sheet by th e ship 's name for each 
fuel factor expended . In order to insure that 
fast battleships and carriers do not expend fuel 
moving two zones in consecutive turns , it is 
suggested that player s mark the turn number 
in the expended fuel box. Under no circum­
stance may a battleship or aircraft carrier move 
two zones in consecutive turns . 
5.27 A ship whose speed is reduced due to 
battle damage still retains its original maxi· 
mum speed when determining fuel expendi • 
lure . EXAMPLE : As a result of battle damage , 
the Bismarck 's speed has been reduced to a 
maximum move of just one zone per turn. It 
does not have to expend a fuel factor every 
time it moves a zone in a non -·c· turn , as would 
the Rodney . For purposes of fuel expenditure, 
it is still considered to have a speed of '2 ', even 
though it can no longer move two zones in a 
turn . 
5.28 German Breakout Bonus: In the first 
turn of play, each German ship may move 
three zones without expending any fuel or 
each German ship may move four zones at a 
cost of one fuel factor , or each ship may move 
five zones at a cost of two fuel factors . Each 
turn thereafter they must move normally . 
5.29 Aircraft carriers cannot move 2 zones in 
a turn that they launch air units . 
5.3 Ship Patrol 
5.31 All ships except aircraft carriers have 
the capability to patrol. Patrolling allows ships 
to use a higher search strength when search · 
ing for enemy ships . Patrolling also improves 
the chances that the Bismarck or Prinz Eugen 
will locate a convoy . 
5 .32 A ship may change to or from patrol 
mode each turn . Any change to or from patrol 
mode must be made before the ship moves 
(EXCEPTION: 8.24). 
5.33 A ship cannot move at all while in patrol 
mode . It may only move when it is in movement 
mode . 
5.34 A ship is in patrol mode only when the 
patrol mode side of its counter is face up. 
5.4 Task Force 
5.41 Either player can combine any two or 
more of his ships , if they occupy the same 
zone, into a task force in the visibility phase . 
There is no limit as to the number of ships 
which may be in the sam e task force . 
5.42 Ships in a task force have an advantage 
in that they all can commence combat against 
enemy ships as a single group . If several ships 
are in the same zone with enemy ships , but are 
not in a task force, only one ship can initiate 
combat . The other ship s in the zone may or 
may not join combat at a later tim e. 
5.43 All ship counters that will operate in a 
task force are removed from the search board 
and replaced by a numbered task force 
counter . The ship counte rs are placed in the 
Task Force box on the appropr iate player aid 
card corresponding to the number on the task 
force marker . There is no limit to the number of 
task forces the British player can organ ize. If 
he runs out of count ers, he may use the ship 
RTB markers . 
5.44 The task forc e marker is moved during 
the ship movement phase . The task force 
marker uses the maximum speed of the 
slowest ship in the task force . The task force 
marker 's move constitutes the move for all 
ships in the task force . Fuel expenditure in a 

---PAGE 5---
task force is determined independently for 
each ship . Ship s may break from task force 
only during the visibility phase. before any 
ships begin their moves. A player has total 
liberty as to how he combine s ships into task 
forces as long as they are in the same zone . 
5.45 A task force can patrol at the search 
capability of any one ship in the task force . Flip 
the task force counter over to the blank side to 
indicate that it is on patrol. 
6.0 AIR UNIT ACTIVITIES 
ON THE SEARCH BOARD 
6 .1 Air Unit Movement 
6.11 Each player can move all , some or none 
of his air unit counters . An air unit can enter or 
pass through any zone on the map (EXCEP­
TION: 6.12). 
6 .12 No German air unit may move through 
two consecutive zones containing a part of 
Great Britain . German air units may fly over 
Eire. 
6 .13 In a turn , an air unit can move any 
numb er of consecutive zones in any direction 
or combination of dir ections up to the maxi ­
mum speed printed on the side of the counter 
that is face up. The maximum speed of an air 
unit can change depending on the mode it is in . 
6 .14 Any number of air units may enter or 
pass through the same zone . The movement of 
air un its has no effect on ship movement and 
vice versa . Air units cannot move off the 
search mapboard . 
6.2 Air Endurance 
6.21 Each air unit has an endurance rating 
which states the maximum number of turns 
that it may be airborne . An air unit may remain 
airborne for fewer turns than allowed by its 
enduran ce rating , but it may never remain 
airborne for more turns than allowed by its 
endur ance rating . If an air unit cannot return to 
its home base by th e conclusion of the last turn 
of its endurance , it is eliminated from play and 
the opponent is awarded two victory points for 
its loss . A player cannot el ect to fly any air unit 
past its endurance even if he accepts the loss 
of victory points . 
6.22 For endurance purpose s. count the turn 
that an air unit leaves base and the turn that it 
returns to base as airborne turns. For example , 
an air unit with a maximum speed of ·5· and an 
endurance of ·2· may fly any number of zones 
up to six from its base in one turn but must 
return to that base in the next turn . Unused 
movement cannot be saved from one turn to 
the next . 
6.23 Some air units have an endurance of 
one turn . These air units must take off and land 
in the same turn . Such an air unit must take off 
from its base in the air movement phase and 
return to base at the end of the air attack phase 
of the same turn . Its total movement in both 
phases cannot exceed its maximum speed. For 
example , a torpedo bomber air unit with a 
maxim um speed of ·5· and an endurance of '1 •. 
flies two zones from the Ark Royal during the 
air movement phase , launches a torpedo 
attack during the air attack phase and returns 
thr ee zones to the Ark Royal, which has moved 
one zone away in its move , at conclusion of the 
air attack phase . Players also have the opt ion 
to fly air units with an endurance greater than 
1 for just one turn . 
6.24 Air Unit Endurance markers have been 
included as an aid in tracking the number of 
turns that LR recon air units (these have great 
enduranc e) can remain airborne . Wh en an LR 
recon air unit flies from its base, the corre ­
sponding 'Return to Base· marker is placed on 
the time record track on the turn that the unit 
must return to base . 
6.3 Reconnaissance and Patrol 
6.31 British Bomb er air units have both an 
attack and reconnaissanc e mode . Each time 
that a British bomber air unit takes off from its 
base. the British player must decide in which 
mode it will operate for its entire mission in the 
air . Once aloft, the mod e of a British bomber 
unit cannot be changed . The mode in operation 
is indicated by putting that side of the count er 
fac e up. Only bomber air units in attack mode 
can launch an air attack. British bomber air 
units , in reconnaissance mode, have an 
improved search and speed capability but 
cannot launch an air attack . 
6.32 LR recon air units can never launch an 
air attack. Instead of an attack mode, they have 
a patrol mode . Like ship patrol , an LR recon air 
unit can switch to or from patrol mode any or 
every turn it is in the air by placing the proper 
side of the counter face up. Any change to or 
from patrol mode mu st be made before the unit 
moves during that turn. 
6 .33 NOTE: While in patrol mode , the maxi­
mum speed of the LR recon air unit is reduced 
to ·2·. but its search capacity is increased . 
6.4 Air Unit Rest and Refit 
6.41 Every air unit which returns to base after 
completing its air mission must undergo a 
period of rest and refit before it can return to 
action . 
6.42 An air unit that has been airb orne and 
returns to its home base must remain out of 
play for the next turn for rest and refit . For 
example , an air unit returns to its home base 
during the '0800 , May 23' turn . It must spend 
the '1200, May 23 ', turn in rest and refit . It can 
return to action on the '1600 , May 23' turn . 
The controlling player remov es the air unit 
from th e search board and places it on the 
' 1600, May 23 ' slot on his Time Record Track . 
During the Unit Availability Phase oft he ··1 600, 
May 23 ' turn , the air unit is returned to its 
home base and can be flown that same turn . 
6 .43 An air unit may not take off or land at any 
other base other than its home base . 
6.44 After rest and refit , an air unit must be 
returned to its home base. 
6.45 Rather than keeping carrier-based air 
units physically with their home carrier, they 
are better placed in Spain or Greenland to 
reduce counter congestion . Just remember 
that their true location is with their home 
carrier . 
7.0 SEARCH 
7 .1 Visibility 
7 .11 Each turn during the visibility phase, the 
German player determines, by dice roll, the 
visibility level for that turn . This visibility level 
determines which zones can be searched for 
enemy ships. 
7 .12 On both player aid cards is printed a 
visibility track comprising nine levels of 
visibility . Each level is displayed as a square . 
The number in each square represents the 
minimum search strength able to search a 
zone at that visibility level. For example , during 
the visibility phase , the German player deter­
mines that the visibility level for that turn is '5'. 
Both players can search only those zones in 
which they have ships and / or air units whose 
total combined search strength is ·5· or higher . 
7 .13 At the start of the game. both players 
place a visibility marker on level ·4 · on their 
visibility track . The British play er will have to 
use the blank marker. Hereafter . any change in 
w eather is based upon the current position of 
the marker on the track . 
7 .14 During the visibility phase of each turn , 
excluding the first turn of the game , the 
German player rolls two dice , cross-indexing 
5 
their sum on the Visibility Change Table and 
moves the vis ibility marker forward or back 
along the visibility track the number of boxes 
equal to and in the direction indicated by the 
result. The result is the visib ility level for the 
turn in progress. On the first turn of play the 
visibility level is automatically level '4' . 
7.15 If the visibility change would force the 
visibility marker off the end of the visibility 
track, the visibility marker rem a ins at the end 
box of the track and the excess is ignored . 
7.16 Underneath several of the extreme 
visibility boxes are modifiers to the visibility 
change dice roll. If a visibility marker is in one 
of these boxes at the start of the visibility 
phase , the dice roll for visibility change for that 
turn is altered by that modif ication . For 
example, if the visibility marker is at level 'Tat 
the start of the visibility phase and the German 
player rolls a '7' for his visibility change dice 
roll , the dice result is changed by +1 from '7' to 
'8'. 
7 .17 Visibility level ·x· means that no search 
can be made in the turn . 
7 .2 Search Procedure 
7 .21 During the search phase, the British 
player may call out any and all zone grid ­
coordinates in which he has ships, air units 
and / or coastal search capabil ity whose total 
combined search strength equals or exceeds 
the visibility level. 
7.22 After the British player has completed 
his search, the German player may call out any 
and all zones by grid-coordinate in which he 
has ships, air units and / or coastal search 
whose total combined search strength equals 
or exceeds the visibility level. 
7 .23 As each zone is called, the opposing 
player must state whether or not any ships 
(never air units) are in the zone in that turn . 
After the first turn , the German player only 
must also state whether any of his ships have 
passed through the zone in that turn . If ship(s) 
are located , the opponent must state the 
number and general type (either battleship , 
aircraft carrier or cruiser) of all ships in the 
zone . He must also reveal which types are in 
the same task force . For example, the German 
player searches a zone which contains the 
Hood and the Prince of Wales in task force and 
the Suffolk and Kenya on patrol. The British 
player states that there are two battleships in a 
task force and two cruisers in the zone. 
7 .24 If a search is successful , the searching 
player does not have to state the type of 
searching force which located it. He reveals 
nothing . 
7.25 Search is voluntary . A player can waive 
any and all of his eligible searches . 
7 .26 When totalling search strength in a 
zone, the searching player must check 
whether the current turn is day or night. The 
left-hand search strength on the counter is 
used only in the day turns. The right hand 
strength on the counter is used only in the 
night turns . Never count the search strengths 
of ships in a task force. Use only the search 
strength on the task force counter . If the task 
force is on patrol use only the patrol search 
strength of one ship in the task force . The 
search strengths of all other ships in the task 
force must be ignored . 
7.27 The British player has an inherent 
search strength of ·4· search points in each of 
the zones occupied by the Faeroe Islands, 
Shetland Islands, the coast of Ireland , the 
coast of Great Britain and Hvalfiord . The 
German player has an inherent search 
strength of '4 ' search points in each of the 

---PAGE 6---
zones occupied by the coast of Norway and 
France . All coastal search strengths are 
reduced to ·3· at night. 
7 .28 An air unit can only search the zone that 
it occupies . It cannot search any of the zones 
through which it moves. 
7 .29 Ships in port cannot be located by sea 
search nor by a combination of air and sea 
search . They can be located by air search only . 
7.3 Fog 
7 .31 When determining the visibility level 
each turn , both players check whether th e 
visibility change dice roll, including any 
modification , will also result in fog . If there is 
fog, the visibility marker is adjusted normally , 
but neither player can conduct a search in any 
fog zone that turn . Search can be conducted 
normally in any and all non -fog zones . 
7 .32 Fog occurs automatically in the first turn 
of the game . Bergen , therefore , cannot be 
searched in the first turn . 
7 .33 No type of combat(naval or air)can occur 
in a zone in fog . 
8 .0 SHADOWING 
8. 1 Shadow Determination 
8 .11 Onl'y the British player has the ability to 
shadow opposing ships or task forces (never 
air un its) located by search or shadow in the 
previous turn . A ship or task force that is 
selected for shadow must make its move (if 
any) before the shadow attempt is resolved and 
then reveal its new position if the shadow is 
successful. The opponent can then reactto the 
shadowed ship's move with his air and ship 
movement . 
8.12 To determine whether a ship can be 
shadowed each turn , a player must perform 
the following steps in the shadow determina ­
tion phase : 
a. Determine shadow assignment 
b. Determine evasion capability 
c. Determine contact maintenance 
8 .13 For each opposing ship or task force to 
be shadowed , the British player may assign 
one ship (excluding aircraft carriers) , task force 
or air unit in the same zone as a shadow unit . 
There can never be more than one unit 
shadowing a single ship or task force. A 
shadowing unit cannot search in the same 
turn . 
8 .14 If the shadowing unit is a ship , its 
current evasion rating must be equal to or 
greater than the current evasion rating of the 
ship or the slowest ship in a task force to be 
shadowed. If it is not equal to or greater than 
the shadowed ship 's evasion rating, the ship 
cannot shadow . If the shadowing ship is in a 
task force , all ships in the task force must be 
faster than the shadowed ship or task force . If it 
is not equal or greater than the shadowed ship 
or task force evasion rating , the ship or task 
force cannot shadow . The British player may 
then select another ship or task force in the 
same zone to shadow . Air units do not have to 
check evasion rating. The two conditions 
required to assign an air unit as a shadow is 
that it must be able to remain in the air during 
that turn and that it, alone, must be capable of 
conducting a search in the turn it is shadow­
ing. For example, an LR recon air unit in patrol 
can only shadow in day turns when the 
visibility level is '6' or less, or night turns when 
the visibility is ·3· or less. 
8.15 Once the shadowing unit or task force 
has been selected, the ship to be shadowed 
makes its move for the turn, then either player 
rolls one die and cross-indexes the result with 
the shadowing unit's name on the shadow 
table . If the result is 'Lost Contact' the shadow 
does not succeed . If the result is 'Hold Contact ', 
the unit is successfully being shadowed , and 
its new location must be revealed. The 
shadowing player does not have to reveal the 
names or types of ships conducting the 
shadow. 
8.16 A player must reaffirm all shadow 
contacts each turn . Even if an opposing ship 
was successfully shadowed in a previous turn , 
the shadow table must still be consulted in the 
current turn to determine whether contact has 
been mainta ined . If a player requests to 
shadow a task force which has broken up in the 
visibility phase , the opponent must reveal 
which ships (by general type) have left the task 
force . 
8.17 The current visibility can affect the 
Shadow Table die roll as explained in the 
Shadow Table . 
8.18 If the controlling player has moved the 
ship or the task force being targeted for 
shadow through two zones, he must announce 
it before the Shadow Table is consulted. The 
Shadow Table die roll must then be reduced by 
' 1' for that ship or task force 
8 .19 A ship or air unit is not required to follow 
the ship it is shadowing in its movement 
phase . 
8 .2 High Speed Shadow 
8 .21 High speed shadow can occur only if a 
successful search is conducted by the Briti sh 
player in the first of two zones entered by an 
opposing ship or task force in its move . If, 
during the Search phase , the British player 
locates a ship which has passed through the 
zone he is search ing, he may immediately 
attempt to shadow the ship or task force with 
one of the ships task forces or air units that can 
qualify for shadow in the zone . The shadow 
can be attempted even if the ship or task force 
has been located in the other zone of its move . 
8 .22 The shadowing player uses the same 
procedure described in 8.15 to determine the 
success of the shadow. The ship to be 
shadowed still gains a '1 • for the two zone 
move on the Shadow Table die roll. 
8 .23 If the shadow is successful, the sha­
dowed ship or task force must reveal its final 
location , if not already known , and any and all 
British ships and air units in the search zone 
which have not utilized thei r maximum 
movem ent and which are not in emergency 
movement may move the one zone into the 
shadowed ship 's zone. Fast battleships and 
aircraft carriers must be able to expend one 
fuel factor to enter the zone if this would be the 
second zone of their move . 
8 .24 A ship on patrol may immediately 
change to movemen t mode in order to follow 
the shadowed ship . If it is a battleship or 
aircraft carrier on patrol , then it must be able to 
expend one fuel factor to move . 
9.0 COMBAT 
9.1 Air Combat 
9.11 Every bomber air unit has the ability to 
attack any of the ships located by search in the 
zone that it occupies . LR recon air units cannot 
perform air attacks . 
9.12 Air units cannot attack enemy air unit s. 
6 
Air units cannot be eliminated in combat . Air 
units are eliminated only if they are unable to 
return to base. 
9 .13 A bomber air unit can launch an air 
attack only if it has started its mission in the 
attack mode . If the bomber air unit has flown 
from base in reconnaissance mode , it cannot 
change to attack mode and cannot launch an 
air attack . Bomber air units cannot attack ships 
in enemy ports . 
9 .14 All air attacks are conducted during the 
air attack phase after all search has been 
completed, but before any naval combat is 
begun. 
9 .15 The British player conducts any and all 
air attack §._ that he wishes to make first . Then 
the German player does the same . 
9.16 Each British bomber air unit is allowed 
to make two strikes each day turn . Each 
German bomber air unit is allowed to make 
one str ike in a day turn . Air units are not 
allowed to make an air attack at night . A British 
bomber air unit can assign its two strikes to 
one ship or assign one strike each to two 
different ships of his choice . 
9 .17 To resolve air combat , the defending 
player places the battle counter of each of his 
ships in the zone under attack face down on 
the battle board . The attacking player assigns 
the strikes he has available in that zone in any 
manner he wishes . For each strike, he rolls two 
dice and consults the proper Bomber Table on 
the battle board for the result . 
9.18 Any damage inflicted takes effect imme ­
diately and is recorded for that ship on the hit 
record sheet . If damage is inflicted , the name 
of the ship must be revealed to the attacking 
player so that he can mainta in a record of 
damage on his hit record sheet . If no damage is 
inflicted, the name of the ship does not have to 
be revealed. 
9.2 Naval Combat Determination and Set­
Up 
9.21 When opposing ships have been located 
in the same zone, naval combat may occur at 
the option of one or both of the players . More 
than one naval action can occur in the same 
zone in the same turn . Naval combat is 
voluntary . A ship or task force can only attack 
enemy ships in the same zone. 
9 .22 A player cannot initiate combat against 
an enemy ship or task force if his ships in the 
zone are not permitted to attack it. 
9.221 Aircraft carriers may never attack 
enemy ships . 
9 .222 A ship or task force may not attack an 
enemy ship or task force if its current evasion 
level is less than that of the enemy unless the 
opponent accepts the combat. When a task 
force is attacking, its current evasion level is 
that of the fastest ship . The evasion level of a 
defending task force is that of the slowest ship 
contained . 
9 .223 A ship or task force cannot attack an 
enemy ship or task force if it has already been 
committed to another combat action . 
9 .224 A shadowing ship or task force may 
only attack the ship or task force it is shadow­
ing. 
9.23 A player may announce attacks against 
only those ships and task forces that he located 
that turn by search or shadow . The British 
player always announces his attacks first. 
9.24 When announcing his intention to 
initiate naval combat , a player must attack 
each single opposing ship (i.e. not in task force) 

---PAGE 7---
or task force separately . A single ship or task 
force cannot be involved in more than one 
naval combat in the same turn . Both players 
must also announce the current evasion levels 
involved . The names of the ships do not have to 
be revealed . 
9.241 When a player has a choice of more 
than one enemy single ship , or task 
force to attack, he announces the general type 
of ship that he wishes to attack. Task forces 
are identified by the most powerful ship 
contained in the following order : 
battleship , cruiser and, lastly , aircraft carrier. If 
a check of evasion levels still permits a choice 
of target of the named type, the ship or task 
force to be attacked must be determined 
randomly (just pull the search counter out of a 
cup). 
9.242 · When a player has a choice of more 
than one single ship or task force with which to 
attack, he must state the type he wishes to use. 
If there is still mere than one ship or 
task force of that type , he must select one 
randomly . 
9 .25 All other ships not involved in combat 
can enter combat at a later time as a reinforce­
ment . 
9.26 In the rare occasions where both the 
Bismarck and the Prinz Eugen are in the same 
zone but not in task force , there is a possibility 
that both can be involved in separate combat 
actions . If this occurs , assume that the 
separate actions are occurring simultaneously 
even though they are to be resolved sequen ­
tially. The ship or task force selected for one 
action cannot participate in the other . The first 
act ion selected must be the first action fought . 
The second combat action cannot be started 
until the first combat action is completed . 
9 .27 Ships cannot break from task force in the 
naval combat phase . When determining 
combat, task forces must be treated in single 
units . Once a task force has been committed to 
naval combat though , not all of the ships 
contained have to participate as explained 
below. 
9.271 If a task force contains an aircraft 
carrier , the carrier does not have to participate 
in combat as long as at least one other ship in 
the task force does join in combat . The only 
way to guarantee attacking an aircraft carrier 
is to catch it alone . 
9 .272 If a task force contains one or more 
ships whose evasion levels are higher than 
those of all opposing ships , then any or all of 
those ships may avoid combat providing at 
least one ship whose evasion level is the same 
or higher than the fastest opposing ship 
remains to fight. The escaping ships may enter 
combat in a subsequent round at the con­
trolling player's option . They must enter the 
battle board from the side opposite that 
entered by the enemy or (if part of the attacking 
force) along the side selected at the start of 
combat . 
EXAMPLE : Combat Determination : 
The British player has successfully shadowed the 
Bismarck with the heavy cruiser Suffolk. He moves 
the Suffolk into the Bismarck 's new locatio n along 
with a task force containing the battleships Hood and 
Repulse , the cruisers Norfolk and Kenya, the aircraft 
carrier Victor ious and a lone battleship King George 
V. The German player moves the Prinz Eugen and a 
couple of air units into the same zone. The visibility 
level is '6', so only the German player has sufficient 
strength to search . He calls out the zone and the 
British player announces that he has in that zone 
two battleships, two cruisers and an aircraft carrier 
in task force and a cruiser and battleship not in task 
force . 
The British player chooses to attack the Bismarck , 
which he has successfully shadowed , w ith his 
battleships . (He is not allowed to attack the Bismarck 
with his aircraft carrier) . Since he has some 
battleships in task force and another battleship by 
itself, he must select rand omly the ship or task force 
that will initiate combat against the Bismarck . Both 
may initiate combat since their evasion levels are 
identical to the Bismarck's. The British player blindly 
selects the King George V to initiate combat . Only 
that ship can start combat against the Bismarck. The 
Hood, Repulse, and cruisers can enter combat at a 
later time as a reinfor cement if not attacked by the 
Prinz Eugen . Note that if the task force had been 
picked , both the Hood, the Repulse and any or all of 
the cruisers could have attacked the Bismarck . 
The German player decides to attack with the 
Prinz Eugen. He can attack the remaining battleship 
(remember the task force is identified as 'battleship ' 
since that is the strongest type of ship it contained) , or 
the cruiser . He chooses to attack the cruiser . As the 
British player has only one cruiser type available (the 
Suffolk) this ship must defend against the Prinz 
Eugen. Since the ships were selected for the 
Bismarck combat action before the Prinz Eugen 
combat action , the Bismarck battle must be con­
ducted first. 
9,28 Naval combat is conducted in the naval 
combat phase on the battle board. The 
defending player always places his ships first 
in the center hex of the battle board . The 
attacking player then places his ships in any of 
the hexes of his choice along one edge of the 
battle board . The attacking player rolls one die 
to determine which edge of hexes he must use 
to set up. 
9 .281 No more than two friendly ships may 
be placed in one hex . If the defending player 
has more ships than can be placed in his 
starting hex, the additional ships may be 
placed in any hexes adjacent to his starting 
hex. 
9.282 A ship must always be positioned 
throughout combat so that its bow points 
toward one of the six hex sides forming the hex 
it occupies . A ship may never point its bow 
toward a corner of the hex. If placed improper ­
ly, the opponent realigns the bow to point 
toward one of the two adjacent hexsides . All 
ships on the same side must point in the same 
direction at the start of combat . 
/',,...._ 
~ ,, ~, 
§ ~ 
~- \ ~ IJ § ' ~ 
- E -
'-' 
Illegal Legal 
9.3 Naval Combat Procedure 
9.31 Naval Combat is conducted in rounds . In 
each round , any and all ships may move one or 
two hexes . Each ship moves within a specific 
sequence , starting with the ship with the 
lowest evasion rating and finishing with the 
ship with the highest evasion rating . If two or 
7 
more ships have the same evasion rating , the 
attacking ships move first before the defending 
ships . After all movement has been completed , 
enemy ships may fire at one another. Upon 
completion of all fire, one or both sides may 
attempt or agree to disengage , after wh ich 
withdrawing ships make a bonus withdrawal 
move . This completes one round . 
9.32 Within one naval combat phase. players 
may fight any number of rounds . The naval 
combat phase is over only when all of one 
player's ships involved in naval combat have 
been sunk or have been successfully dis ­
engaged . 
9.33 None of the survivors of a naval combat 
action can participate in any other action in the 
same turn . They must wait until the next turn 
to recommence combat . 
9.4 Reinforcements 
9.41 At the conclusion of the third round of 
battle. and every round thereafter , either or 
both players , if they have qualified ships in the 
zone available to enter combat , may roll for 
reinforcement. For each individual ship or task 
force to enter, the controll ing player rolls one 
die . A result of ·1 • permits it to enter combat in 
the next round . For each subsequent attempt 
for that particular ship or task force an 
additional • 1 • can be subtracted from the die 
roll. 
9.42 When reinforcements enter , the con­
trolling player must roll a die to determine 
along which edge of hexes he may place the 
reinforcing ship or ships . All reinforcing ships 
from the same task force must point in the 
same direction . The reinforcing ships must be 
at least six hexes away from all enemy ships . 
9 .43 Only those ships that can attack at least 
one enemy ship in the naval action may enter 
as reinforcements. 
9 .44 A ship or task force which is able to enter 
as a reinforcement may delay its entry . It can 
enter in any subsequent combat round at the 
controlling player 's option . A player is never 
required to bring reinforcing ships into battle. 
9.45 If there are two separate naval actions 
occurring in the same zone, a player must 
record on paper each potent ial reinforcing ship 
and task force to either of the naval actions 
before any combat begins. A ship or task force 
which is committed to reinforce one naval 
action cannot reinforce the other naval action . 
EXAMPLE : From the previous l!Xample , the 
British task force containing the battleships Hood and 
Repulse, the cruisers Kenya and Norfolk and the 
aircraft carrier Victorious can legally enter as a 
reinforcement into either the naval action against the 
Bismarck or the naval action against the Prinz Eugen. 
Before any combat begins , the Briti sh player must 
record which naval action the task force is to 
reinforce . 
9.5 Naval Combat Movement 
9.51 In each combat round, a ship may move 
two hexes , one hex or not at all depending 
upon its current evasion level. 
9.52 Ships are also allowed to change the 
direction in which they are moving depending 
upon their current evasion level. A change of 
direction is defined as changing the direction 
of a ship 's bow to point toward either one of the 
two hex sides adjacent to the one its bow is 
currently poin ting 

---PAGE 8---
MOVEMENT ON BATTLE BOARD 
Current Ension Rating 
0 1-3 4-10 11-17 18-24 25-29 30+ 
Maximum 
0 0 1 0 Movement 
(in hexes) 
or or 
Maximum# of 
0 1 1 2 Direction Changes 
Per Round 
9.53 The movement and turning capability of 
ships 'on the battle board are displayed in the 
Combat Movement Chart shown above. Note 
that at certain evasion levels. a ship has a 
choice of moves and turns that it can make . For 
example, a ship with an evasion level of 28 can 
move ahead two hexes and make up to one 
change of direction ; or it can move just one hex 
and make up to two direction changes; or it can 
not move at all and make up to three direction 
changes . 
9.54 A ship is never required to move or make 
any directional change . It may complete none 
or part of its move without penalty . 
9 .55 A ship may never move into a hex 
occupied by an enemy ship . 
9.56 A player may physically move a ship 
counter off of the battle board or start 
reinforcing ships off the battle board . In this 
situation , all ships in play must be shifted the 
same number of hexes in the same direction to 
return the ship to the battle board . In those rare 
cases where it is impossible to fit all ships on 
SECTOR DIAGRAM 
1 0 1 2 0 1 2 1 2 
or or or or or 
1 2 1 0 3 2 1 3 2 
the battle board , extend an imaginary field of 
hexes outward around the board . Position and 
move the ships in these imaginary hexes. 
9.6 Naval Fire Designation and Resolution 
9 .61 In each round , afte r any and all move­
ment , a ship may fire at any enemy ship within 
'A' or ·s· range . A ship that is one. two or three 
hexes from a firing ship is in its 'A ' range . A 
ship that is four, five or six hexes from a firing 
ship is in its ·s· range . A ship which is seven or 
more hexes from a firing ship is beyond its 
firing range and cannot be attacked by the ship . 
9 .62 Fire for each ship is resolved individual ­
ly. A ship may fire at more than one enemy 
ship . A player must designate the number of 
salvoes each of his ships intends to fire at 
enemy ships before resolving any fire . The 
firing procedure for one ship must be com ­
pleted before the designation and resolution of 
fire for another ship is begun . If a ship is sunk 
before all fire directed at it has been resolved , 
the remaining salvoes designated against it 
are lost. The defending ship(s) always fire after 
all attacking ships have completed their fire . 
8 
9.63 Every ship has four gun sections, each of 
which has a certain sector of hexes into which 
it can fire . The Sector Diagram illustrates each 
gun section and the hex sector into which it 
can fire . A gun section cannot fire any of its 
salvoes at a target that is not in its sector . The 
two secondary armament gun sections are 
further limited in that each section may only 
fire at a target in its sector in 'A" range . It 
cannot fire at a target in ·s· range . Only bow 
and stern turret gun sections can fire at targets 
within sector in 'A' and ·s· ranges . 
9.64 To determine the total number of shots 
that a ship can fire at a specific target ship , a 
player first has to total the salvoes for each gun 
section that can fire at the target . In the log 
pad, four groups of gun boxes are printed 
beside each ship's name which correspond to, 
and are labelled by, gun section . In each box is 
a salvo number indicating the maximum 
number of salvoes that that gun section can 
fire . If there is a zero in a gun section box. that 
gun section has no fire power . 
9.651 When a ship fires at an enemy ship 
more than one hex away , its total salvo count 
targeted for that ship must be halved (rounded 
DOWN). This is the number of shots that the 
ship can fire . For example . the Bismarck is 
firing all of its guns at a ship two hexes away . 
The number of shots the Bismarck can fire is 
eight (half its total salvo count of 17). 
9 .652 A ship does not halve its salvo count if 
firing at a target ship occupying the adjacent 
hex. In this case, the number of shots it can fire 
is equal to its salvo count . 
9 .66 For each shot fired , the attacking player 
rolls two dice and cross -indexes the result with 
the proper range and field offire column on the 
battle board . The result is either a miss which 
causes no damage , or a hit which is directed at 
a specific gun section or at the ship's midships . 

---PAGE 9---
9.67 The corr ect field of fire column to be 
used is determined by selecting one of the 
diagrams that corresponds to the attitude of 
the firing ship to the target ship . 
9.68 Naval Combat fire is never blocked by 
other ships . A ship can alway s fire at an enemy 
ship within range . 
9 .7 Damage 
9 .71 Record of Damage 
9 . 711 All hits rece ived are recorded on th e Hit 
Record sheet in th e proper section indicated in 
the damage results . Hits are alway s marked off 
from left to right so that the gun boxes with the 
highest salvo count are marked out first. Note 
that as gun hits are acquired , a ship's salvo 
count is reduced . As an example, the Bismar ck 
has received two port secon dary hits, two bow 
turret hits, and three midships hits after one 
round of combat. Damag e is marked out as 
illustrated below . 
9 .712 When a hit result states either ·consult 
Special Damage A' or 'Consult Specia l Dam ­
age B' the attacking player rolls again for that 
shot on the appropriate Special Damag e 
Table. 
9 .713 All Naval Combat fire is conside red 
simultaneous . Damage does not take effect 
until all combat fire for the round has been 
resolved . For example, the Bismarck star ts out 
with a bow turret salvo count of seven . If two 
bow turret hits are acquired in the first round , 
the Bismarck still may count seven salvoes for 
the bow turret in the first round ; however, in 
th e second round, the Bisma rcl<. would get only 
five salvoes for the bow turret. 
9 .714 A ship is not sunk unt il every midships 
box has been marked out . For exam ple, it takes 
ten mid shi ps hits to sink the Bismarcl<., six 
midships hits to sink the Rodney , etc. If a ship is 
sunk before the combat round is over , it still 
rolls its lull number of shots for that round . 
When a ship other than the Bismarck is sunk , it 
is removed from the game. When the Bismarck 
is sunk , the game is over . 
9 . 715 To record dam age without losing count 
of the ava ilable salvoes for the current round , 
the following system should be used. For 
damage received in the current roun d, mark a 
slash (/ ) in the appropriate gun section boxes. 
After all fire l'las been comp leted for the round , 
cha nge each slash to an ·x·. 
9 . 716 A port secondary box can only be hit by 
a ship fi ring on the targ et ship 's port side. A 
starboard seconda ry box can only be hit by a 
ship firing on the target ship's starboard side . If 
a ship is firing directly into a targ et ship's bow 
or stern , both the port and starboard secondary 
box can be hit. 
SECONDARY 
BB AND BC 
BISMARCK 
BOW 
TURRETS 
EVASION AATING , 29 
ARMAMENT STERN 
PORT STARBOARD TURRETS MIDSHIPS 
~ ~ I1 ,6 Js J4 l3 J2J , I XXXJ I I 
AMMUNITION · 14 
9 
9.717 A hit scored on a gun section that has 
been completely knocked out is treated as a 
midships hit , inst ead. For example, the Hovd 
has already rece ived one hit to its port 
secondary box. The Bismarck , firing from the 
Hood 's port side , gets another secondary hit. 
Since the hit cannot be record ed on the 
starboard secondary box and there are no 
unmarked boxes remaining for the port 
secondary gun section , th e secondary hit must 
be recorded as a midsh ips hit. 
9.72 Damage to Evasion Rating 
9 .721 As a ship receiv es damage there is a 
possibil ity that it will also incur a reduction in 
its evasion rating . The reduction can be eittier 
temporary or permanent. 
9 .722 Anytime a ship receives a hit re5u lt 
either by air or naval combat which states 
" REDUCE EVASION LEVEL BY X AMOUNT" , it 
must reduce its current evasion by the amount 
specified . This reduct ion is perman ent and 
cannot be repaired . 
9 . 723 For each midsh ips hit that a ship 
recei ves, even if it also rece ives permanent 
evasion damage in the same result , the currem 
evasion rating is reduced , depending upon 
type . This reduction is temporary and can be 
repaired . 
9.724 The Bismarck reduces its evasion level 
by '1 ' for every midships hit receive d. All other 
battleships and aircraft carriers redu ce their 
evasion level by '2' for every midships hit 
received . 
9 .725 The Prinz Eugen reduces its evasion 
level by ·3· for every midships hit recei ved. 
9 .726 All cru isers reduce their evasion level 
by ·5· for every midships hit received . 
9 . 727 There is space to keep a record of the 
current evasion level for each ship on the Hit 
Record sheet. 
9 .728 In any turn in wh ich a sh ip moves 
either one zone or not at all on the search 
board , it may attempt to repair lost evasion 
rating fac tors by roll ing one die on the 
EVASION RATING REPAIR TABLE . Repair can 
on ly be done immediately upon completion of 
all movement in the ship movement phas e. 
Midship boxes are NEVER repairea . 
EVASION RATING REPAIR TABLE • 
Die 
Roll 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Number of Evasion 
Rating Factors 
Regaine d 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
9 .729 A ship whose current evasion level is 
between '16' and ·24· inc lusiv e, must utilize a 
maximum speed of ·1 • on th e Search Board . A 
ship whos e current evasion level is between 
'7' and ·15 ' inclusive must move by emergency 
speed . A ship whos e current evasion level is '6' 
or less can not be moved. It may be towed by a 
battleship , by a sh ip of the same type, or any 
two ships. All ships involved in the tow must be 
placed in task force and must move at 
emergency speed . 

---PAGE 10---
9.8 Special Combat Fire Restrictions 
9.81 The Rodney has no stern turrets. It does 
have a third bow turret, but it is positioned so 
that it can fire only into the port and starboard 
secondary armament sectors out to 'B' range 
On the Hit Record Pad, the third bow turret is 
located with the stern turrets. It is treated as a 
bow turret when taking damage . For each 
stern turret hit from broadside the Rodney 
receives, the British player rolls one die. A 
result of '1 • or ·2· converts the hit to a bow 
turret hit to either bow gun section. A result of 
'3', '4', '5' or '6' converts the hit to a bow hit 
that must be taken by the third turret. When 
firing at the Rodney's stern, all stern hits are 
treatFd as a secondary hit . 
9.82 The Rodney must fire its stern turret at 
half strength (rounded down) if it also fires its 
main bow turret at a target in A range. The 
stern turret can always fire at least one shot. 
9.83 In each round that the Prince of Wales or 
King George Vfire their guns, there is a chance 
that one of the gun sections will be unable to 
fire . A die roll of '1 •. ·2· or ·3· results in no 
penalty to fire . A die roll of '4', ·5· or '6' forces 
either the bow or stern turret gun section to 
reduce its salvo count to half strength (rounded 
down) . If there is a strength reduction, second 
die roll of '1 ·, '2' or '3' forces the bow turret to 
reduce its salvo count and a '4', ·5· or '6 ' result 
forces the stern turret to reduce its salvo count . 
9.84 Cruisers must always use Special 
Damage Table A when receiving special 
damage, regardless of the range. If the result is 
Special Damage B, use Table A in the same 
manner as Hood, Repulse and Renown . 
9.9 Withdrawal 
9.91 Attempts to disengage and withdraw 
ships from combat can occur only at the end of 
a naval combat round after all combat fire for 
that round has been resolved. 
9.92 If both players agree to withdraw all of 
the ships involved in combat, the naval 
combat phase is immediately over and the 
players proceed to the next phase . 
9.93 If only one player wishes to withdraw, or 
if both wish to withdraw some of their ships, 
each may do so with any ship whose evasion 
level is higher than every opposing ship of the 
same or larger general type within six hexes of 
it, i.e., a cruiser cannot prevent a battleship 
within six hexes of it from withdrawing. 
9.94 At the beginning of each round, in­
cluding the first round, players state which of 
their ships intend to withdraw . Blank counters 
are placed on top of withdrawing ships. Those 
ships whose evasion levels are reduced below 
that of opposing ships within six hexes cease 
to be in withdrawal status and lose their blank 
counters. 
9.95 At the end of each round, all ship 
counters with blank counters. MUST move one 
additional hex after the conclusion of all 
combat. The bonus move is the same as a 
normal combat move except that the 
withdrawing ship cannot change its direction 
in the hex it exits . It may change its direction 
one hex side in the hex that it enters . 
9.96 Both the normal combat move and the 
bonus move of a withdrawing ship must be 
made so that the ship never moves closer to an 
enemy ship than it presently is, unless it is 
impossible to do otherwise. 
9.97 If, at the end of any bonus move, a 
withdrawing ship no longer has any enemy 
ship within six hexes of it, then it has 
successfully withdrawn from combat . Its 
counter is removed from the battle board and it 
cannot be involved in any other naval combat 
for the remainder of the turn . 
9.98 While withdrawing , a ship has all of its 
shots for each gun section halved (rounded 
up ). If a gun section has already been 
halved, halve (rounding up)whatever remains. 
9.99 A ship may voluntari ly withdraw but 
once in the process of withdrawal , a ship may 
NOT voluntarily dis engage from the 
withdrawal effort . 
10 .0 CHANCE PHASE 
10.1 At the end of each turn . the British 
player must roll two dice for each German ship 
and consult the CHANCE TABLE . The first dice 
roll always applies to the Bismarck or to both 
German ships, if in task force . The second dice 
roll always applies to the Prinz Eugen when not 
in task force . Many times when the Prinz 
Eugen is in task force with the Bismarck. there 
may seem to be no need for the British player to 
make a second dice roll. It should be made 
anyway, so as not to reveal the Prinz Eugen 's 
position in relation to the Bismarck . 
10.2 There are three types of results that 
appear on the Chance Table : GENERAL 
SEARCH; HUFF-DUFF; or CONVOY LOCA­
TION. 
10.21 If the result is a set of three numbers , 
the German ship must reveal its current 
position to General Search if the three 
conditions enumerated below are fulfilled : 
10 .211 The ship is in a zone in or east of the 
line of zones identified by a white circle and in, 
or south of, zone row E. This area is defined as 
the British patrol line . 
10.212 The current visibility level is equal or 
less than the number to be applied . 
10.213 The ship is not currently in a fog zone 
in a turn in which fog occurred . 
10.214 Which of the three numbers applies 
depends upon the ship 's location. If the ship is 
in or within two zones east of a whit e cir cle 
zone, the left-most number in column 'A ' is 
used . If the ship is within two zones of the 
coast of Great Britain . Eire, or th e Shetland 
Islands , the right most number in Column 'C' is 
used . If neither of these two cases apply, the 
center number in column 'B' is used. 
10.22 If the result is HUFF-DUFF, it is 
assumed that the ship in questi on has issued a 
radio message which th e British have traced 
back to its source through its HUFF-DUFF radio 
tracking equipment. The German player must 
announce one zone grid -coordinat e. This grid­
coordinate must either be in th e zone that the 
ship currently occupies or in one of the six 
zones adjacent to it. 
10.23 When the result is a possible located 
convoy, the German player gets victory points 
for destroying the convoy if the ship or task 
force in question meets the following two 
requirements : 
10.231 The ship or task force has been 
neither successfully shad owed nor located by 
search in the current turn. 
10.232 The ship or task for ce is at the 
location and mode requ ired to locate the 
convoy . 
10.24 There are two line s emana tin g from 
Great Britain and labelled either ATLANTIC or 
AFRICA CONVOY. If a ship is to be on rout e to 
locate a convoy, it must be in a zone containing 
one of these lines . If a ship is to be one zone 
10 
from route to locate a convoy, it must be in a 
zone adjacent to one containing a convoy line . 
It cannot be on the route . If a ship is to be within 
two zones of a convoy route, it can be either on 
route, one zone from route or two zones from 
route . 
10.25 If a German ship qualifies in locating a 
convoy , and the German player wishes to 
receive victory points for destroying it, he 
states the name of the ship or ships involved 
and their current location. The ship or ships 
cannot move on the search board in the next 
turn . If the German player does not wish to 
attack the convoy , he says nothing and play 
proceeds to the next turn . 
10.26 Only one convoy can be destroyed each 
day. 
11.0 TIME 
11.1 Night 
11.11 Across the search board runs the 55° 
line . The ·2000 · turn in any zone south of the 
55 ° line is a night turn . The '2000 ' turn in any 
zone north of the 55° line is a day turn. The 
'2400 ' turn is always a night turn . 
11.12 Ships involved in naval combat during 
a night turn can only fire at opposing ships in 
their 'A ' range. They must use the 'B' range 
combat tables for all combat fire during night 
turns . Air units cannot launch an attack at 
night. 
11 .13 When consulting the Chance Table for 
a ship in a night zone, only the HUFF-DUFF 
result is recognized . There can be no general 
search or convoy attacks in a night turn . 
1 .2 Time Record 
11 .21 Each player records the passage of 
each turn by moving his time marker to the 
next turn. 
11 .22 After all phases of a turn have been 
completed , the turn is over and the time 
marker is moved to the next turn . 
11.23 In the Basic Game , time starts at the 
'1200 May 22 ' turn and must end upon the 
conclusion of the ' 1200 May 27' turn. 
12.0 Victory Conditions 
12 .1 The Basic Game ends when one of the 
following five situations occur . 
12 .11 The Bismarck is sunk . 
12.12 The Bismarck enters any one of the 
ports of Trondheim , Bergen, Brest or St. Naz­
aire . 
12 .13 The German player has accumulated 
more points than it is possible for the British 
player to score . 
12.14 Play has reached the time limit . 
12 .2 At the end of play, both players total up 
the number of victory points gained as listed on 
the Victory Point Schedule . The player with the 
highest total is declared the winner. In the 
event that both players have the same amount 
of victory points, the game is a draw . 
12 .3 British Victory Point Schedule: The 
British player accumulates victory points for 
thte following events as they occur . 
12.31 Sinking the Bismarck-30 points 
Sinking the Prinz Eugen-10 points 
12 .32 Bismarck enters a friendly port with at 
least one midships hit-6 points . 
Prinz Eugen enters a friendly port with at 
least one midships hit-2 points . 

---PAGE 11---
12.33 Bism arck enters any friendly port on a 
May 22 turn. or has not left Bergen by the end 
of the 2000 M ay 22 turn- 14 points 
Bismar ck ente rs any fri endl y port on a May 
23 turn- 12 poin ts 
Bismarck enters any fr iendly port on a Ma y 
24 turn -10 points 
Bism arck enters any fr iendly port on a M ay 
25 turn - 8 points 
Bismarck enters any fr iendly port on a May 
26 tu rn- 6 points 
Bism arck ente rs any fr iendl y port on a M ay 
27 turn-4 points 
12.34 Bismarck is at sea at th e end of the 
game with an evasion level of 21 or less- 6 
points 
Prinz Eugen is at sea at the end of th e game 
with an evasion level of 21 or less-2 points 
12.35 Each German air unit which is una ble 
to return to base- 2 points 
12.36 No convoy has been sunk-4 points 
12.4 German Victory Point Schedule : The 
German player accumulates victory points for 
the following events as they occur . 
12.41 Sinking the Victorious-24 point s 
Sinking the Ark Royal-20 point s 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Barker, Ralph , Torpedo Bomber!, Ballant ine 
Books, Inc ., 1957 . 
Bekker, Cajus., The Luftwaffe War Dia ries, 
Macdon ald & Co., 1964. 
Grenfell, Russell , The Bismarck Epis ode, Faber 
and Faber , Ltd ., 1948 . 
Hezlet, Sir Arth ur, Electron ics and Sea Power, 
Stein and Day, 1975. 
Hough , Richard , The Hunti ng of Force Z, 
Fontana Books, 1963. 
Janes , F.T., Fightin g Ship s 1939, Arco, 1940 . 
Kennedy, Ludov ic, Pursuit, the Sinking of the 
Bismarck, Wm ., Colli ns, 1974 . 
(the best single book on the Bism arck opera­
tion) 
Lenton / Macd onald ship data books. 
Martienssen , Ant hony, Hitle r and his A dm i­
rals , Secker and War burg, 1948 . 
Rohwer , J. & Humm elchen, G., The Chronolo ­
gy of the War at Sea 1939 -1945 .. Vol. I, Arco, 
1974 . 
Roskill , Capt. S.W., The War at Sea, Vol. 1, 
H.M.S .O., 1954 . 
Schmalenback , Paul, Profile Warship Bis­
marck, Profile Pubs., 1972 . 
Scholfield, B.B., Loss of the Bismar ck, U S.NI. , 
1972 . 
Winterbotham , F. W., The Ultr a Secret, Dell 
Publishing, 1974 . 
Both Nathan Okun and Andrew Sm ith made 
tremendous scholarl y con tribution s. Nathan's 
help was mainly in ordna nce and arm or 
penetration . The Advanced game charts are 
his brain chi ld. Mu ch of his research w as 
original and was carr ied out at various 
archives in the Wa shington, D.C. area . A ndrew 
Smith fielded all the tough quest ions that I 
could not handl e. Much of his effor t took him 
through his rather large private library as w ell 
as the English Public Record Off ice . 
Sinking the King George V, Prince of 
Wales (each)-16 points 
Sinking the Hood-14 points 
Sinking the Rodney-12 points 
Sinking the Repulse , Renown 
(each)-10 points 
Sinking the Revenge, Ramillies 
(each)-8 points 
Each heavy cruiser sunk-6 points 
Each light cruiser sunk-4 points 
12.42 British player mobilizes a ship on 
escort duty (see British order of appear­
ance)-1 point. 
12.43 Each Brit ish air unit which is unab le to 
return to base-2 points 
12.44 German ship destroys first convoy-6 
points 
German ship destroys second con­
voy-6 points 
German ship destroys third convoy-8 
points 
German ship destroys fourth con­
voy-10 points 
German ship destroys fifth convoy-12 
points 
11 
12 .45 Bismarck is at sea with damage but 
with an evasion level of 22 or greater at 
the end of the game .-2 points 
12.46 Bismarck is at sea with no midships 
damage at the end of the game.-4 
points 
Prinz Eugen is at sea with no midships 
damage at the end of the game,-2 
points 
12.5 Each player receives victory points for 
causing damage to enemy ships still afloat at 
the end of play . 
Each midships hit to battleships or 
aircraft carriers-2 points 
Each midships hit to cruisers-1 point 
12.6 A German ship can never enter a non­
friendly or neutral port . 
12. 7 If a German ship enters a friendly port, 
the game is not over until any and all combat is 
concluded . The Bismarck and/or Prinz Eugen 
can be attacked by ship and/or air in a port 
zone the turn either or both enter the port . 
Once the Prinz Eugen has spent a turn in port, 
it cannot be attacked by ship . It can be attacked 
once by air. If it leaves port and returns back 
to port. it can be air attacked again . 
DESIGN CREDITS 
'Bismarck is dedicated to my Father and 
Mother' 
Game Design: Jack Greene, Jr. 
Special Design and Development : Mick Uhl 
Components Design: Jack Greene, Jr. and 
Mick Uhl 
Game Development : Jack Greene, Jr., 
Nathan Okun, Andrew Smith, Wes Coates and 
Craig Ransom 
Historical Research: Jack Greene, Jr., Nathan 
Okun , Andrew Smith and Wes Coates 
Playtesting: Wes Coates, Al Bisasky, Tony 
James, Rian van Meeteren, Craig Ransom, 
Arnold Blumberg , Seth Carus, Gary Sipes, 
Webb Ewell , Charles Vasey, Claude Blood­
good, Tas Ryne, Mark Saha, Harti Ammann, Jr. 
and all others who served in the 'by mail' 
playtest . 
Graphics and Layout: M ick Uhl, Bob Haynes 
and Jean Baer 
Typesetting: Colonial Composition 
Printing : Monarch Services 
Special Thanks to Andrew Smith , Nathan 
Okun, Wes Coates and Craig Ransom who 
provided invaluable assistance to the design 
and direction of this game. 
Copyright 1979, The Avalon Hill Game 
Company , Baltimore, MD 
Printed in U.S.A. 
